# Hormones integrate multiple environmental and developmental signals

### Cellular elongation response as a result of asymmetric auxin distribution modulates differential growth via regulation of ROS <a href="#udluvfar3g1" id="udluvfar3g1"></a>

Plant researchers have been examining the role of individual regulatory components and their cellular effect for some time but it has only recently become clear that the tissue specific location of these components has become clear. Studies using the Arabidopsis root to investigate the effect of hormones have on growth have revealed specific tissues have increased sensitivity to certain hormones (Ubeda-Tomás et al., 2012). For example it was recently shown that the endodermis is an important site of GA signaling and a recent experiment using fluorescently labeled GA’s demonstrated that GA’s were being actively transported there (Ubeda-Tomas et al., 2008, Ubeda-Tomás et al., 2009, Shani et al., 2013). Therefore it is important to be able to visualize where plant hormones are produced, transported and perceived. A recent advance is the development of a the DII-VENUS auxin reporter, which is composed of a fast maturing yellow fluorescent protein in frame with the Aux/IAA auxin interaction domain (known as DII) which is driven by a constitutive promoter(Band et al., 2012c, Brunoud et al., 2012). This allows the visualization of auxin flux dynamics and is an improvement on the older DR5 reporter system which relied on the transcription of a reporter genes to generate a signal, while conversely the DII:VENUS system constitutively produces a fluorescent signal that is abolished in the presence of auxin. The insights Band et al., (2012) generated using this reporter provided regarding the timing of statolith sedimentation and auxin redistribution kinetics were discussed earlier. It will be interesting to see what other creative ways this new tool can be applied to the research of plant and environmental interactions.

The induction of root bending due to Auxin signaling also interacts with reactive oxygen species (ROS). The exogenous application of hydrogen peroxide on the outside of a root is able to make it turn towards the side where it was applied (Joo et al., 2001). Joo _et al_., (2001) examined ROS accumulation in maize roots that were gravistimulated, they used the conversion of ferrous ion (Fe2+) to ferric ion (Fe3+) to demonstrate that ROS concentration transiently increased. They demonstrated that ROS were observed in the lower cortex of the root within 30 min putting ROS accumulation downstream of asymetric hormone redistribution indicates that asymmetric production of ROS could play a role in the gravitropic response (Joo et al., 2001). This was further supported when they applied auxin to the root tip and were able to observe the accumulation of ROS using fluorescence microscopy. Interestingly when a auxin transport inhibitor was applied to the roots ROS were still able to induce root curvature suggesting that the role of ROS could be downstream of auxin signaling which is supported by the inhibition of gravity induced root bending by the application of antioxidants (Joo et al., 2001).

Another plant hormone that can influence ROS accumulation is GA, which is also known to promote cell elongation and cell division. The recent creation of two fluorescently labeled GA compounds demonstrated that GA is accumulating in the endodermal cell of the root elongation zone in order to promote cell elongation (Shani et al., 2013). In the distal elongation zone cell enlarge rapidly increasing in length by ∼10-fold over 5 h with a constant cell width therefore this increase in the volume of the cell will cause a decrease in the concentration of the hormone GA and other small molecules found inside (Band et al., 2012b). The dilution of GA that occurs in the shootward direction was predicted to cause a rapid cell expansion causes an increase in DELLA stability

### GA and ABA regulate DELLA stability to regulate ROS accumulation <a href="#y7vhuwtj4lv9" id="y7vhuwtj4lv9"></a>

Two NADPH oxidase catalytic subunit genes, _AtRBOHD_ and _AtRBOHF_ have been shown to be involved in ABA signaling, double mutants having impaired ABA-induced stomatal closure and Ca2+ channel activation, which are both rescued by exogenous H2O2. ABA inhibition of seed germination and root elongation are also impaired in the rbohD/F double mutant suggesting a general role for ROS and NADPH oxidases in ABA signaling (Kwak et al., 2003). Analysis of the Arabidopsis genome has shown that the promoters of many of the GA-down-regulated genes contain ABA response elements (ABRE), demonstrating more complex cross talk mechanisms (Ogawa et al., 2003). The antagonistic effects of GA and ABA are obvious at many stages during plant growth and development. For example, germination and growth are promoted by GA, but inhibited by ABA (Koornneef et al., 2002). Studies have shown that both the metabolism and downstream signalling targets of these hormones are interlinked and play important roles in regulating endodermal cell elongation and division rates (Duan et al., 2013, Ubeda-Tomas et al., 2008). ABA levels are positively regulated by DELLA proteins via the up-regulation of the expression of the _XERICO_ E3 ubiquitin ligase. Over-expression of _XERICO_ has been shown to cause increased levels of ABA, resulting in greater drought tolerance; however the downstream signaling mechanism post-ABA accumulation remains elusive (Ko et al., 2006). ABA pre-treatment inhibited the GA-induced degradation of GFP-tagged RGA protein (GFP–RGA) suggesting that the presence of ABA stabilizes DELLA proteins, while some evidence also indicates that ABA inhibits GA responses by affecting proteins downstream of DELLA (Ko et al., 2006). DELLAs are known to modify the amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that are present in a cell by inducing superoxide dismutase (SOD), while the production of ROS has also been shown to function as secondary messengers in ABA signaling in guard cells.

### DELLA proteins regulate cellular redox potential and maturation rates <a href="#kdgm0as9ka1c" id="kdgm0as9ka1c"></a>

Many hormones such as ethylene, ABA, cytokinin and auxin have all been shown to interact with GA metabolism and DELLA stability (Achard et al., 2006). Microarray experiments investigating the response of DELLA mutants to stress have revealed that DELLAs have a role in moderating the effects of both biotic and abiotic stress, in part by altering the cell’s redox potential. Achard _et al_ (2008) showed that roots of the _ga1-3_ mutant were incapable of accumulating reactive oxygen species (ROS), indicating that DELLA proteins control ROS accumulation. DELLA proteins were found to induce the expression of the Cu/Zn- superoxide dismutase (SODs) genes _CCSD1_ and _CSD2_, suggesting a mechanism for suppression of ROS accumulation (Achard et al., 2008, Kliebenstein et al., 1998). Thus, when plants are subjected to stress, DELLA accumulation up-regulates SOD production, causing a decrease in the amount of ROS, which, as well as relieving stress symptoms, was also suggested to reduce growth of the root Achard, Gong et al. 2008). As a wide array of environmental stimuli are capable of affecting GA metabolism and the stability of DELLA proteins, this provides a mechanism to coordinate the responses to diverse environmental factors such as cold and salt (Achard and Genschik, 2009). In the absence of stress, the converse happens; a reduction in the amounts of DELLA proteins causes a decrease in SOD activity resulting in ROS accumulation, thus increasing root growth (Gapper and Dolan, 2006). It is unclear how ROS accumulation causes cell elongation, but they may function as secondary messengers, as H2O2 does during ABA signaling in guard cells (Kwak et al., 2003). It is clear that plant growth rates are related to the degree of environmental stress and that this may be mediated via the hormonal (ABA and GA) control of ROS metabolism. These dynamic interactions between ABA and GA agonistically regulate ROS accumulation and the downstream signaling pathways.

### &#x20;<a href="#id-6x41pupip6w2" id="id-6x41pupip6w2"></a>

### Conclusion: Multiple external environmental stimuli are integrated by auxin gradients <a href="#ox7gsrdwgjgj" id="ox7gsrdwgjgj"></a>

### Where genes are expressed and hormones take effect <a href="#id-5zt7cna870x4" id="id-5zt7cna870x4"></a>

Technological advances that allow specific tissues to be separated using specific promoters to target fluorescent markers so that cells expressing the marker can be isolated. These protoplasts have been used to create large data bases that provide researchers with predictions as to the location and relative expression level of their gene of interest (Nawy et al., 2005, Brady et al., 2007). Advances in proteomics has also led to the development of tissue specific protein maps being generated (Petricka et al., 2012) and recent progresses in sequencing technology has led to the generation of a tissues specific microRNA localization map (Breakfield et al., 2012). These experiments were performed using microarrays and wild type plants so can only reveal the site of expression majority of the transcriptome in unstimulated plants. Interestingly, microarray experiments of gravi- and mechani-stimulated seedlings have revealed much of the transcriptomes response to these stimuli (Kimbrough et al., 2004, Moseyko et al., 2002). Differentially expressed genes identified by microarrays or other methods can then quickly have their localization characterized _in-silico_. It will be interesting to see if RNAseq analysis of tissue specific protoplasts generated by fluorescent cell sorting correlates with previous microarray experiments. It will also be interesting to see what insights recent advances in total mRNA and small RNA sequencing technology provide when applied to the various tropisms.

### High-throughput imaging, modern image analysis software <a href="#aal4jrwq0wrz" id="aal4jrwq0wrz"></a>

Multi-disciplinary approaches are providing new opportunities to examine plant growth at a great resolution and in more dimensions. For example a collaborations between software engineers and biologists have led to the creation of a semi-automated image analysis software that is capable of measuring root growth rates using a time lapse image series (French et al., 2009, Basu et al., 2007, Jaffe et al., 1985b). French et al., (2009) went to enhance their software to count the number of lateral roots emerging from the primary tap root and in order to handle root curves more reliably (Naeem et al., 2011). These new software systems are capable of analyzing many images in a time series and producing data on root growth kinetics, curvature and sites of curvature (Miller et al., 2007). In order to increase the throughput of this analysis pipeline an automated image acquisition system was developed that is capable of photographing the growth of Arabidopsis roots over long periods of time (Wells et al., 2012, Subramanian et al., 2013). When combined together these tools provide a high-throughput phenotyping pipeline that is capable of screening mutants identified by genome wide analysis methods or mutagenesis screens. However, these screens rely on plants growing on a 2D agar surface which may cause subtle phenotypes that can only be observed in a 3D growth environment to be observed. To resolve this a 3D root image analysis system was developed to visualize the root system architecture (RSA) of rice and maize roots using a clear gel media and images acquired from multiple directions (Iyer-Pascuzzi et al., 2013). This system was used to assess the growth of a rice QTL mapping population and has revealed which regions of the genome are responsible for the various RSA characteristics quantified by the software (Topp et al., 2013). However, gel media is homogenous and allows light to penetrate both of which are characteristics that roots don’t usually encounter in their natural soil environment. The application of X-ray imaging and computed image analysis is now also providing insights into how roots grow in a soil environment and how their RSA adapts to changes in soil moisture (Mooney et al., 2012, Mairhofer et al., 2012). It will be interesting to see what opportunities future technological advances provide.

The subtle physiological changes in the root system that occur in response to varying mineral, water and hormonal concentrations can been measured using a high-through put 3D imaging system (Iyer-Pascuzzi et al., 2010, Mairhofer et al., 2012) and has been used to describe the effect of reducing nitrogen and phosphorous concentration in the model species Brachypodium. After proof of principle in Brachypodium this technology is now being applied to Rice populations that that have high density of known single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers, now providing QTL mapping and GWAS tools that can be used to investigate which genes are involved in controlling root tip growth and root system architecture in important crop species ([Thomson, Zhao et al. 2012](https://mail.google.com/mail/ca/u/0/?ui=2\&shva=1#13daa23c64f7b750\_\_ENREF\_132)). In addition, this is also a good example of a high-throughput root phenotyping system being developed on a model species and then applied on a crop. In a manner that is likely to provide markers that can be used for marker assisted backcrossing to produce new varieties optimizing plant performance by improving nutrient use efficiency and/or by greater deficiency tolerance.

### High throughput cellular analysis <a href="#id-8edu1361xx4y" id="id-8edu1361xx4y"></a>

As well as measuring whole organ size and how it changes over time, it is also important to measure the various parameters that contribute to these growth rates. Confocal microscope images are a great way of acquiring cell and tissue scale measurements; however, extracting data from large scale confocal image data sets is a currently slowing progress. Cell-o-tape is a tool that was recently developed to measure the length of cells, its allows the researcher to swiftly acquire the length of all the cells they draw a line though, assuming the quality and resolution of the image are high enough (French et al., 2012). Another tool known as CellSeT has been developed to analyze confocal microscope images to define the geometry of the tissues, the boundaries of the cells, to determine their polarity and to quantify the orientation and/or intensity of fluorescent reporters (Pound et al., 2012). These high-throughput quantitative processes are useful tools that can be combined with root growth kinetics data to assist the development of mathematical models describing root growth and its response to various environmental stimuli. For example, Huang et al., (2012) have recently presented a fiber reinforced hyperelastic-viscoplastic model to describe the expansion of the cell walls that determine the final length and shape of the cells. They describe how biological concepts such as cell wall rigidity or loosening can be described by adapting the plasticity theory. They proposed a mathematical model of what they call the hyperelastic-viscoplastic theory in order to explain the interactions between cellulose microfibrils and the cell wall matrix (Huang et al., 2012). In addition, their model takes into the effect of temperature and also considers the mechanisms required to cause directional growth. Another model developed by Dyson _et al_., (2012) that described the cell wall as a material composed of stiff cellulose microfibrils embedded in a pectin matrix which is crosslinked by a network of hemicellulose polymers. The model allows for strain-enhanced breakages and enzyme-mediated hemi-cellulose crosslink repair kinetics resulting in a mathematical description of the dynamic systems that control nonlinear anisotropic growth. The models predictions agreed with experimental data revealing how enzymes such as the XTH and expansin families can soften the cell wall allowing it to stretch (Dyson et al., 2012). These models are providing a new way of thinking about plant growth and asking new questions for biological researchers to investigate. It will be interesting to see how the gene and protein interaction models influence the cell-wall biomechanical models. In turn how these cell wall models affect models that describe tissue growth models as these will affect subcellular hormone concentrations which will need to feed back into gene and protein regulation models. So it will be exciting to see the evolution of these multi-scale models and how these may interact with environmental models (Band et al., 2012a).

### Many more important questions still need to be addressed <a href="#id-1dfoctnz0u3c" id="id-1dfoctnz0u3c"></a>

Classical genetics and molecular biology have provided fascinating insights into the importance of amyloplasts sedimentation in columella cells, Ca2+ fluxes, InsP3 signaling, ROS accumulation and inter/intra-cellular pH changes. However, there are many questions that still need to be addressed such as what are the first steps of gravi-perception? Do we know all the components involved in the signal transduction pathway and how they interact with other environmental signaling pathways? How do these other environmental signaling pathways interact with hormonal metabolism and transport? New technologies that examine global gene and protein expression levels and localization are speeding up research. However, this unprecedented amount of information provides both opportunities and challenges that need to be overcome. New high throughput image acquisition and processing methods are needed in order to thoroughly examine the lists of genes being generated by new transcript based technologies.

Precisely measuring how root tips respond to their environment is unraveling many of the genetic networks that coordinate the growth and development of plant roots and how they coordinating internal hormonal gradients to regulate organ growth rates and direction. We still have a limited understanding of root-root interaction and root-rhizosphere interactions so new novel root assays are needed to dissect the genetic networks that integrate these biotic signals. This will also contribute to our understanding of competitive interactions in both natural and agricultural communities, potentially providing useful insights into the complementarity of root systems both in space and nutritional requirements during novel mixed-cropping and agroforestry systems. Finally understanding how multiple environmental signals are perceived by various molecular receptors and subsequently transmit signals that causing significant changes in the physiological behavior of roots will assist in the modification of (crop) root system functionality and efficiency in the future.
