# Hydrotropism

### Crosstalk between hydrotropism and gravitropism <a href="#o2sek0586df9" id="o2sek0586df9"></a>

One of the less understood characteristics of root growth is how plants respond to moisture gradients and adjust to optimize water uptake (Eapen et al., 2005). Hydrotropism is the root's ability to perceive water gradients and to optimize root system architecture to optimize the acquisition of water-found soil. Hydrotropism studies have always been difficult to interpret because root growth is also under the guidance of other tropisms such as negative phototropism, thigmotropism and positive gravitropism (Eapen et al., 2003, Takahashi et al., 2002, Cassab, 2008). Thus various tropisms interact to optimize root growth in order to support the aerial organs, to provide water for them, and forage for nutrients (Miyazawa et al., 2011). Hydrotropism was first demonstrated by Van Sachs (1887) with the “hanging basket technique” that showed root growth towards moisture gradient. Van Sachs (1887) described a simple experiment in which he planted pea seeds in a freely hanging basket covered with damp sawdust. When the roots emerged from the basket, they grew downward towards gravity, then became diverted from gravity and grew along the wet substrate at the bottom of the basket (Cassab 2013). After the discovery of hydrotropism (a term coined by Darwin, Pfeffer and Weisner), the idea that roots grow into the soil in search of water was suggested to be the most important reason for the downward orientation of roots but this orientation is guided by gravity and not water gradients (Hart, 1990 , Cassab et al., 2013).

Studies using pea mutants have revealed that there are integrated mechanisms that exist between gravitropism and hydrotropism (Jaffe et al., 1985a). This integration contains mechanisms that reduce the gravitropic response in the presence of a moisture gradient making it easier to observe hydrotropic growth (Takahashi and Suge, 1991, Jaffe et al., 1985a). Arabidopsis roots grow toward a higher moisture gradient even in the presence of gravity (Takahashi et al., 2002, Takahashi et al., 1996). Takahashi et al., (2003) studied the role of amyloplast degradation in columella cells during hydrotropism response in _Arabidopsis_ and Radish seedlings. They used the _pgm1-1_ mutant which has a reduced in amyloplast size in columella cells reduced the gravitropic responses and allowed a stronger hydrotropic guidance for root growth in response to water gradients (Takahashi et al., 2009). Thus, statolith degradation in response to moisture gradients can reduce the root's gravi-sensitivity while improving their hydro-sensitivity. This was further supported by clinorotation of _Arabidopsis_ seedlings that showed positive growth towards moisture gradient as a result of degraded amyloplasts (Kobayashi et al., 2007). The relative importance and ability of the root cap cells to differentiate signals between gravitropism and hydrotropism remains elusive while the role of the starch statoliths appears clearer. These cells are important for directing Auxin gradients across a root in response to both gravity and water. To further demonstrate their importance, Miyazawa _et al_., (2008) used laser ablation to remove the different columella cell layers demonstrating the importance of these cells during the hydrotropic response. Thus the asymmetric auxin distribution to the new lower side of the root causes cell expansion one side to be inhibited bending the root in response to not only gravity but also water gradients. Takahashi et al., (2002) have studied the response of the auxin-deficient mutants _axr1_ and _axr2_ to moisture gradients, showing reduced gravity and increased hydrotropic responses. When taken together these data suggest that the columella cells act as sensors for these two tropisms and coordinate auxin redistribution, so root growth can adapt to water availability while integrating the direction of the gravity vector.

### Hydrotropism interacts with PIN trafficking components <a href="#id-23wopigu4a2j" id="id-23wopigu4a2j"></a>

Miyazawa _et al._, (2009) identified MIZ2, which codes for a novel allele of GNOM, encoding guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factor type G proteins (ARF-GEF). The GNOM protein is important for the vesicular trafficking of Auxin transport components. Knockout alleles of _gnom_ mutants are associated with severe developmental defects in embryo development (Steinmann et al., 1999, Mayer et al., 1993). Plants carrying more mild mutant alleles show a reduced capacity to respond to gravitropic stimuli. _mizu-kussei2_ (_miz2_) is a mutant allele of GNOM showing gravitropism and a reduced capacity to respond to moisture (Iwata et al., 2013). A drug called brefeldin A (BFA) has been widely used in yeast, mammalian and plant cells as a reversible inhibitor of vesicle trafficking which has been shown to inhibit GNOM-mediated vesicle trafficking in _Arabidopsis_ root (Geldner et al., 2003). ARF-GEFs is the primary molecular target of BFA and BFA inhibits activation of ARF proteins by binding to an ARF-GDP/ARF-GEF. BFA-resistant or BFA-sensitive ARF-GEF variants differ in a number of amino acid residues consistently conserved in the central catalytic Sec7 domain and these residues were shown to be critical for BFA resistance of yeast and mammalian ARF-GEFs. The critical residues in GNOM protein carry the hallmarks of BFA sensitivity and render the action necessary for vesicle budding and cargo selection (Robineau et al., 2000, Peyroche et al., 1999). The overall output of the endomembrane traffic is dependent on the contribution of each BFA-resistant and BFA-sensitive protein. BFA treatment of wild-type plants inhibits the complete development of hydrotropic curvature and also inhibits gravitropism (Geldner et al., 2003). Whereas Arabidopsis seedlings expressing GNM696L displayed normal hydrotropic response irrespective of the BFA treatment; However, _miz2_ mutants treated with BFA inhibited both hydrotropism and gravitropism response in Arabidopsis roots. Plants harbouring a BFA-resistant GNOM variant show normal hydrotropic response in the presence of BFA. Furthermore, a weak _gnom_ allele, (BFA sensitive variant) _gnom_ B/E, showed a defect in hydrotropic response. These results indicate that GNOM-mediated vesicular trafficking plays an essential role in hydrotropism as well as gravitropism (Miyazawa et al., 2009).

### Links between thigmotropism and osmotic signaling on the plasma membrane <a href="#mp0wk4lkjj43" id="mp0wk4lkjj43"></a>

Recent studies in gravitropism (Blancaflor et al., 1998), touch (Massa and Gilroy, 2003) and light (Kiss et al., 2003) have shown that root cap cells perceive the primary signals and interact accordingly with various tropic responses. Kobayashi et al (2007) identified a gene that was shown to be highly expressed in the columella cells using a pMIZ1::GUS construct. The _miz1_ mutant displayed normal root growth and gravitropic response rates but is impaired in hydrotropic response to water gradients. This mutant was named after the term “mizu-kussei” which means water tropism in Japanese. Interestingly, there was no apparent morphological difference between root cap and columella cells of _miz1_ and wild type but the altered wavy suggests that MIZ1 could also play a role in thigmo- and phototropism. MIZ1-GFP protein fusion was observed in the transition zone in the meristematic region, the lateral root cap cells, and the first and second stories of columella cells. MIZ1 is associated with the ER membrane at the cytoplasmic side in root cortical cells (Yamazaki et al., 2012). While plants overexpressing with MIZ1 had reduced auxin levels and a reduced number of lateral roots (Moriwaki et al., 2011). In addition, Iwata _et al_., (2013) also demonstrated that the MIZ1 overexpression lines had a greater root density in solid regions that had a higher water potential.

### Cytokinin is involved in maintaining the integrity of root meristems during water stress <a href="#vvlnwp1q86nl" id="vvlnwp1q86nl"></a>

The recently described _altered hydrotropic response_ 1 (_ahr1_) mutants are able to grow on water-stressed media whereas wildtype roots adjusted their growth to avoid it (Saucedo et al., 2012). This was demonstrated when petri dishes half containing water stress medium (WSM, MS salts supplemented with sucrose, glycerol and alginic acid) and the lower half consisting of normal nutrient media (NM, half strength MS salts supplemented with sucrose) were used to grow Arabidopsis wt and _ahr1_ mutant seeds sown on the upper half of the square petri dish. Saurcedo et al (2012) recently showed that _ahr1_ was able to direct its primary root growth towards the source of higher water availability. However, under osmotically stressful conditions the root tip morphology of _ahr1_ mutants was well preserved in contrast to the wild type roots that were stressed and had reduced starch accumulation within their columella cells. Interestingly, when the _ahr1_ roots were grown on plates containing kinetin they exhibited hydrotropism like those of the wt, indicating that cytokinins also have a role in regulating lateral root emergence and primary root growth. In addition, _ahr1_ was able to survive when transplanted to soil, whereas wt plants dried out demonstrating improved drought tolerance. To further characterize the response of _ahr1_ mutant was compared with _nhr1_, _miz1_ and _miz2_. In their screening system Saurcedo _et al.,_ (2012) observed a hydrotropic response from wt roots that were capable of stopping or redirecting growth to avoid water-stressed media while similar to _ahr1_ the _nhr1_, _miz1_, _miz2_ mutants displayed no hydrotropic response. However, _ahr1_ roots grew longer compared to the wt, _nhr1_, _miz1_ and _miz2_ mutants. Therefore, _ahr1_ root growth was not comparable to the other hydrotropic mutants because root growth was not inhibited in water-stressed media.
