# Primary root growth influenced by directional environmental cues

### Plant root growth adjusts to a fluctuating and heterogeneous environment <a href="#og4pcdchezq2" id="og4pcdchezq2"></a>

Plants use gravity as a directional guide to drive their shoots above ground for photosynthesis, gas exchange and reproduction and direct their roots down into the ground for anchorage and water and nutrient uptake. When a plant is rotated on its side, its shoots turn upward whereas the roots curve down, even in the absence of light and water gradients. This implies that cells within these organs are capable of converting the potential energy supplied by the earth’s gravitational field to a chemical signal that modulates growth direction. Yet, this important process occurs as the organ grows within a highly heterogeneous environment. To ensure the plant architecture is optimal for survival and reproduction, plant organs have to properly integrate the global information coming from their environment to develop growth behaviours that allow them to perform their primary functions. In this review, we will discuss how roots interact with their soil environment, where multiple parameters convey equally important information for the root’s primary functions such as light, gradients in humidity, nutrients, oxygen and temperature, mechanical impedance or biotic interactions.

### Primary root growth is determined by cell division and cell expansion <a href="#auje2s3bcvvm" id="auje2s3bcvvm"></a>

The _Arabidopsis_ root is an excellent model for investigating root growth behaviour in response to gravity and other environmental stimuli because its cytological, developmental and physiological properties are well characterized. Root growth is achieved by two main mechanisms: cell division and cell enlargement. Cell divisions occur within the root apical meristem (RAM). Located at the distal tip, the RAM is organized around the quiescent centre (QC), a small group of cells that rarely divide but create a niche that is critical to maintaining the surrounding cells in a stem-cell-like state (also named initial cell) (Dinneny and Benfey, 2008, Nawy et al., 2005, Dolan and Davies, 2004). These stem cells have the interesting characteristic of undergoing asymmetrical cell division leading to the production of one daughter cell maintaining its initial status (the one juxtaposed to the QC), the other continuing to divide to eventually form files of cells that will expand in the elongation zones, then differentiate into specific cell types within the maturation zone. Hence, different stem cells around the QC can be distinguished based on the cell type they will generate within the root: the outermost initials will lead to epidermal and lateral root cap cells, followed more centrally by initials that yield cortical and endodermal cells, then those that will generate proto-vasculature cells. On the distal side of the QC, initials will yield the columella cells at the centre of the root cap (Dolan et al., 1993; reviewed in Benfey and Scheres, 2000; and Bennett and Scheres, 2010) (Figure 1). After several rounds of division, cells exit the RAM and enter a region of cell elongation. It is here where the majority of root elongation occurs from cell expansion in the elongation zone. Although elemental growth rates are uniformly low across the meristematic region, they become faster within the distal elongation zone and reach their maximum in the central elongation zone before gradually decreasing within the maturation zone, a region where cells progressively differentiate into their mature cell fate (Ishikawa and Evans, 1993).

Cell expansion requires the coordination of many cellular processes such as ion transport during vacuolar growth. It requires the production of new cell walls and membranes at the surface along with the influx of water to increase turgor pressure (Kuchen et al., 2012). Cell expansion can occur isotropically over the entire cell surface causing non-directional growth, or it can be anisotropic leading to cell elongation. Within the elongation zone of the Arabidopsis root, cell expansion occurs mainly along the longitudinal axis of the root, causing growth to occur along this axis. Root growth is modulated by a variety of cues dictated either by environmental stimuli or by endogenous parameters such as alterations in the levels of hormones or other signaling molecules. A root can modify its direction of growth either by modifying the direction of cellular expansion in the various tissues or by altering the rate of cellular elongation on opposite flanks (Green et al., 2010).

### The cytoskeleton orientation during cell expansion and elongation <a href="#w9mtm3g4jwne" id="w9mtm3g4jwne"></a>

The regulation of the orientation of cortical microtubules (CMTs) in interphase cells of the elongation zones controls the direction of growth by affecting the axes of cell elongation. CMTs organizational state in expanding cells is regulated by many spatial and temporal signals that are modulated by environmental and developmental cues. The cortical MT arrays take different patterns/alignments between the meristem/DEZ (random), central elongation zone (CEZ) (transverse), distal elongation zone (DEZ) (helical) and differentiation (longitudinal) zones. CMTs are responsible for aligning the inextensible cellulose microfibrils within the apoplast allowing the cells to elongate directionally under turgor (Green, 1980). If CMTs are not present then cellulose microfibrils align based on the preexisting cell wall, as the cellulose microfibrils constrain the expansion of the cells to an axis perpendicular to their orientation (Baskin, 2001). However, the absence or disruption of the CMT arrays does not always lead to the incorrect deposition of cellulose microfibrils, suggesting there are potentially other methods of regulating cellulose deposition and consequently anisotropic cell expansion (Baskin, 2001, Minorsky, 2004, Himmelspach et al., 2003). It is not yet clear exactly how CMTs control the directional deposition of the cell wall, but it may be by directly influthe path of cellulose synthase complexes as they produce cellulose. Or, it may be indirect by influencing the deposition of other parts of the cell wall matrix (Himmelspach et al., 2003, Sugimoto et al., 2001, Sugimoto et al., 2003). Although it has recently been demonstrated using cytoskeletal inhibitors, they are required for callose synthase and cellulose synthase membrane association in tobacco (Cai et al., 2011). Thus actin filaments interacting with the endomembrane system are capable of regulating the site of membrane localization and are therefore capable of polarizing cell wall deposition.&#x20;
