# Thigmotropism

### Touch modulates root gravitropic response <a href="#anunntwegr9j" id="anunntwegr9j"></a>

The perception of gravity guides plant root growth downwards into the soil in order to utilize water and nutrients. However, when roots encounter obstacles like stone or glass barriers they turn and take a new direction of growth over the surface. This adaptive response of a plant organ to physical impedance of growth or a mechanical stimulation is known as thigmotropism. A mechanical stimuli can be a short transient stress such as wind while other physical interactions such as gravity or turgor pressure are considered chronic stresses (Jänig, 1968). An example of thigmomorphogenesis as a result of transient stresses is when trees subjected to wind develop shorter and thicker trunks to reduce damage by powerful gusts of wind (Coutand et al., 2008). For a plant to respond to touch, the plant organ needs to sense the stimuli, and then translate the signal through a cascade of events causing appropriate growth response modifications to occur. Root waving and coiling is an example of interaction of gravitropism and thigmotropism (Mullen et al., 1998, Simmons et al., 1995). Both below and above ground portion of the plant organs respond to touch, plant roots typically grow away from touch (negative thigmotropism) while conversely tendrils show positive growth towards a touch stimuli (positive thigmotropism). Darwin (1880) hypothesized that root cap cells are touch sensitive and can avoid impenetrable surfaces. Massa and Gilroy (2003) reported similar avoidance behavior in _Arabidopsis_ roots and suggested that the cells of the root cap sense touch stimuli and their subsequent signaling acts on the columella cells to modulate their response.

When roots encounter a barrier, the root curves appears in the central and later the distal elongation zones forming a step like structure, this allows the root tip to remain in contact with the barrier while maintaining a root tip angle of \~136o that prevents the side of the root coming into contact with the surface (Massa and Gilroy, 2003). To define the relative contributions of gravity and touch sensing components, columella cells were removed by laser ablation. When plants that had columella cells ablated came into contact with a barrier, their ability to respond to it was impeded resulting in their adoption of a final tip angle of \~166o to the barrier became nearly horizontal with the edge of the root touching the barrier (Massa and Gilroy, 2003). Similarly, the growth behavior of mutant _pgm-1_ was similar to wild-type as it grew at the same angle when it encountered obstacles but its growth became more variable over time. To see if touch might play a role in the initial event of gravisensing, authors have also compared the amyloplast sedimentation in touch stimulated and unstimulated controls. Touch stimulation caused a significant reduction in the amyloplast sedimentation rates of columella cells, suggesting touch stimulation on the cell surface was capable of altering columella cell function in part by reducing amylopast starch density (Massa and Gilroy, 2003). Recent technological advances are now providing us with increasingly higher resolution images showing where Ca2+ signaling events occur within cells that are touched which then spreads to neighboring cell, these and other new markers for Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) and pH changes promise to provide new insights into the precise role of Ca2+ signaling during gravitropism and other environmental responses (Choi et al., 2012).

### The actin microtubules regulation by kinases and GTPases <a href="#id-39yfl4fqivkl" id="id-39yfl4fqivkl"></a>

A gravi- and thigmotropism screen on a tilted agar surface identified the _wvd2-1_ overexpression mutant displayed a skewed root growth behavior which slanted perpendicular to the gravity vector. Interestingly seedlings overexpressing WVD2 with the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter caused the plants to exhibit a constitutive right-handed helical growth in both roots and etiolated hypocotyls due to impaired anisotropic cell expansion (Yuen et al., 2003). In roots these phenotypes were caused by changes in the organization of cortical microtubules within cells of the root cap and the distal elongation zone. WVD2 contains a conserved “KLEEK” domain found in plants and can be found in seven other _Arabidopsis_ genes and are distantly related to the vertebrate microtubule-associated protein TPX2. Yuen _et al_.,(2003) over expressed one of these, _WVD2-LIKE 1_, caused a phenotype similar to _wvd2-1_. WVD2 and a close homologue WDL1 co-localize with the cortical microtubules and were shown to cause microtubules bundling _in vitro_. Silencing WVD2 and its orthologs caused an increase in the amount of root skewing in the wild-type direction suggesting this gene family is involved in regulating rotational polarity and anisotropic cell expansion. Thus, the TPX2 domain may be used by the WVD2 family to organize microtubule orientation (Perrin et al., 2007).

Many environmental and genetic factors contribute to well-ordered patterns of transverse microtubules that promote cell elongation and restrict radial cell expansion. In order for the correct organization of parallel arrays with a perpendicular orientation relative to the axis of cell elongation to occur ROP6 is required. ROP6 is an Rhp-family GTPase and its overexpression leads to the distortion of cell shape and incorrect organ morphogenesis in due to alteration in epidermal cell shape (Fu et al., 2009, Fu et al., 2005). ROP GTPase signaling mediating cell expansion has also been demonstrated in root hair cells where ROP2 was shown to be localized preferentially to the region of the cell where expansion occurs. The activation of these ROPs by auxin occurs within 30 seconds but is dependent on AUXIN-BINDING PROTEIN 1 (ABP1) and in turn then activates RIC1 and RIC4 which have been shown to bind to microtubules. Xu _et al_., (2010) showed that the auxin transporter PINFORMED 1 has its localization coordinated by two Rho GTPases ROP2 and ROP6. They show that the cytoplasmic auxin gradients perceived by ABP1 are then converted to cytoskeletal response by Rho GTPases, interacting with RIC protein function and consequently changing PIN localization (Xu et al., 2010, Mucha et al., 2010). The _rop2_ mutant was shown to cause a reduction in polar cell expansion due to inhibition of the formation of fine cortical F-actin suggesting that Rop proteins control tip-localized F-actin dynamics in root hairs and as a result modulate polar cell expansion (Fu et al., 2002). F-actin have also been shown to be required for GNOM-positive endosome-dependent PIN recycling to the plasma membrane, which is supported by the observation that Auxin transport inhibitors can stabilize actin, linking PIN stability and localization to actin cytoskeleton dynamics (Niko et al., 2001, Dhonukshe et al., 2008). Interestingly the involvement of the cell wall in maintaining PIN polarity was also demonstrated by manipulating the cellulose-based extracellular matrix using both genetic and pharmacological approaches (Feraru et al., 2011). Auxin-ROP crosstalk may also be an important mechanism in regulating local auxin gradients coordinating cell polarity and cytoskeletal dynamics.

### Candidate genes involved in touch responses <a href="#j56309lcp6l5" id="j56309lcp6l5"></a>

The suggestion that mechanosensitive ion channels act as plant mechanoreceptors was originally derived from evidence for their role in mechanoperecption in other kingdoms (Ching, 2005). This was supported by a touch response assay that identified multiple calmodulin like genes that are involved in the downstream touch signaling (Braam and Davis, 1990). Three of the TOUCH (TCH) genes codes for calmodulin while the other two (_TCH1_ and _TCH2_) codes for calmodulin-like (CML) proteins. _TCH4_ encodes a xyloglucan endotranglucosylase/hydrolase (XTH) (Braam and Davis, 1990, Sistrunk et al., 1994, Xu et al., 1995). Expression levels of the TCH genes increased in 30 min after a mechanical stress. Skewing and waving behavior of the root on a hard agar surface is due to interaction between touch and gravity responses. Mutant alleles of _tch2_ have shown altered root skewing behavior and reduced root length when grown on hard agar plates. This growth behavior also displayed differences in cell file rotation, when the epidermal cells of the _tch2_ mutants had their microtubule structures visualized using the MBD-GFP reporter, they showed differences in cortical microtubule orientation (Wang et al., 2011). Taken together these data suggest that calmodulin-like proteins may play a role in mechanosensing response.

_TCH3_ accumulates in the cell elongation zone and can be up-regulated by the application of exogenous auxin demonstrating it has a role in auxin mediated regulation of cell expansion (Antosiewicz et al., 1995). External calcium application was sufficient to induce the _TCH3_ gene expression, suggesting a role of _TCH3_ during cross talk between Ca2+ and auxin signaling pathways (Braam, 1992). Interestingly it has recently been shown that _TCH3_ is involved in Auxin transport regulation via interaction with a protein serine/threonine kinase known as PINOID (Benjamins et al., 2003). PINOID acts antagonistically to PP2A phosphatase, both partially co-localize with PIN proteins and act antagonistically on the phosphorylation state of PIN proteins. This regulates PIN localization and subsequently auxin flow (Bennett et al., 1996, Benjamins et al., 2001, Friml et al., 2004, Friml, 2003, Michniewicz et al., 2007). Benjamins _et al_., (2003) showed that TCH3 appears to bind to PINOID in response to a change in Ca2+ concentration, this changes PINOIDS ability to phosphorylate PIN proteins, affecting the rate of PIN protein internalization into subcellular vacuoles. This interaction provides an interesting link between Ca2+ signaling and auxin transport during photo- or thigmotropic responses.

### TCH4 is up regulated by auxin and brassinosteroids to alter cell wall composition <a href="#cezn2rekt6tr" id="cezn2rekt6tr"></a>

Many XTH family genes influence cell elongation rates by breaking xyloglucan chains which increases the elasticity of the cell wall increasing the cells elongation rates in response to touch stimulations. The cell wall is primarily composed of cellulose microfibrils linked to a pectin matrix by a network of hemicellulose polymers. Plants require xyloglucan to hold their cellulose microfibrils together forming a cell wall have the flexibility to stretch in one direction while also having the tensile strength to restrict cell expansion but this linear isotropic growth is dependent on enzymatic regulation by the TCH/XTH and expansins (Rose et al., 2002). This is supported by recent mathematical modeling work that demonstrated how the targeted enzymatic degradation of crosslinking polymers can provide the directional extensibility (Dyson et al., 2012). Cleavage of xyloglucan by XTH family members such as TCH4 promotes cell wall expansion (Campbell and Braam, 1999). Expression of TCH4 increases in response to auxin and brassinosteroid treatment, indicating that gradients of these hormones can cause differential cell loosening. However, not all 33 members of the XTH family members show induction by these hormones (Xu et al., 1996) .

### Ethylene and JA mediate some plant responses to mechanical stimuli <a href="#z0wtu0mjey9b" id="z0wtu0mjey9b"></a>

Jasmonic acid (JA) is required for thigmomorphogenetic alterations in many species (Cipollini Jr, 1997, Chehab et al., 2012). More specifically JA biosynthesis has been implicated in _Arabidopsis_ using transgenic plants over expressing a JA biosynthetic gene that caused an increased sensitivity to touch (Chehab et al., 2012). They showed that some touch induced growth alteration require JA signaling and biosynthesis. As touch responses could still be observed in a mutant defective in a key JA biosynthesis gene _ALLENE OXIDE SYNTHASE_ (AOS) and therefore defective in biosynthesis of JA mutant demonstrating that many touch responses are JA independent. JA is known to slow cell division in order to slow growth so resources can be allocated away from growth and towards systemic-defense secondary metabolism producing shorter tougher plants that are more resistant to mechanical perturbation (Coutand et al., 2008, Zhang and Turner, 2008). Interestingly, the curling tendrils of _Bryonia dioica_ and the closure of the Venus fly trap plant also require JA signaling to occur correctly (Weiler et al., 1993, Escalante-Pérez et al., 2011). JA signaling mediates mechanostimulus-induced plant developmental responses and repetitive mechanostimulation enhances _Arabidopsis_ pest resistance providing additional protection against biotic pests. Thigmotropic stimuli such as wind or touch can also induce ethylene biosynthesis (Biro and Jaffe, 1984, Takahashi and Jaffe, 1984). Although plants that were mechanically stimulated have phenotypes that resemble plants treated with ethylene (Jaffe and Forbes, 1993), ethylene response mutants that can still respond to touch-induced thigmomorphogenesis suggest it too is also not essential for thigmomorphogenesis. Yamomoto _et al_., (2008) developed a screen using a two layer growth media where the lower layer was harder than the upper to investigate the root response to changes in the physical nature of the roots environment. They showed that there was an inverse relationship between the amount of root bending at the intersection and the level of ethylene production. The addition of ethylene synthesis modulators or biosynthesis mutants demonstrated that the severity of the roots bending response was dependent on ethylene concentration and was either due to root-tip softening or hardening combined with differential root-cell growth (Yamamoto et al., 2008).
